Dax, do you use Daxchess?
I don't use Daxchess, but I did watch the conference, and because I don't use Daxchess,
I was pretty confused for most of it, so I honestly would just love for you to explain
to me everything they're talking about.
Oh geez.
I don't know what percentage you understood, but probably more than I did.
[music]
I use Daxchess all the time.
I think that's been my default for like three years, and I'm so confused.
All the React18 stuff has been confusing me for weeks, months, I don't know, a long time,
and now I'm just, I've literally just finished watching all of the next Daxchess Comp videos,
so my headspace right now is I'm swimming in information.
Overwhelmingly, I feel like it's so much to take in, and yet so little.
If you think about the big conference, or the big keynote bullet points, or the three things,
it's like Turbo Pack, so all the rebuilt we'll talk about, all the build tooling, it's like
the Apple Silicon move, they're doing it all in house, they're building it all in Rust.
Then there's the layouts RFC, so there's, that's like the whole routing, next 13, like
the core of it is this layouts RFC, which we'll talk about, and then the third thing
was like components that make things nicer, like using images and fonts.
It's like higher level web stuff, okay?
So the first one, I think the reason I feel so overwhelmed and confused, oh geez, I just
woke up and started watching videos this morning.
Dax is having a look at like my hairs everywhere, mad scientist style.
The overwhelming feeling I have, I think is because of React 18, I think it's just I still
don't fundamentally understand, maybe you understand some of the React 18 stuff.
That's where I really struggle is like, high level I understand server components, but trying
to like parse out what is React versus what is next versus what is Vercelle just feels
like this impossible task.
So that's like my high level meta comments and thoughts, I don't know, like you asked
a specific question and I'm just rambling, because it's early and I don't know.
I mean, overview is helpful.
Yeah, on that last point, what is next, what is React, what is Vercelle?
I think the thing you said is accurate, they're kind of like Apple, trying to own every piece
of it all the way down to the build tooling, which results in probably really cool experiences
like very cohesive if you're in the next world, it's probably going to be as good as it can
possibly get.
But there's some interesting, I don't know if you're following along with the conversation
the other day, there's some interesting implications of it for it because technically React isn't
like owned by Vercelle and at least for technique, yeah, at least for the history of React so
far it was, you know, shepherded by Facebook, Facebook never really directly needed to monetize
React, right?
Right.
So it was somewhat neutral, but now it seems more and more governed by a company that directly
monetize React.
So I think there's a lot of questions around what level of influence is Vercelle having
over the React roadmap, I think some people pointed out yesterday, yeah, it is a little
weird they merge React server components and release it as a beta to time with like a marketing
effort by Vercelle.
That doesn't seem very, very neutral.
I think as an end user in the short term, it's like, oh, that's great, like everything's
working together, that's good, but it does bring up questions for, I mean, other frameworks,
I think the only other framework using RSC is hydrogen right now, which I haven't heard
of before all this, I've heard about it now.
I've been hearing about them forever and it was always just like they're waiting for React
server components to be a thing and there's waiting and waiting and all of a sudden like
next needs in, it's like, boom, ready to go, right, so there's like, yeah, there's some
kind of, I'm curious how that plays out in the long term, if this like level of influence
and bias ends up actually hurting the ecosystem and even the core framework.
Yeah, they had the live Q&A right after the keynote and the React, what's his name?
I forget the React core contributor that was on the panel.
He didn't actually, Lee Rob didn't introduce the people on the panel, so I couldn't even
watch the video and get the names, it's like I know, I know who Tim is, I've seen his face
on GitHub, but the other was, yeah, I mean, you're talking about the guy, I think he was
in a plaid shirt.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, he's, he's like a, he made Redux maybe with Dan, yeah, he worked
on it with Dan.
I'm bringing Dan as a name too.
Yeah, well, he sat there and said that next year, 13 is like the real React 18 release
and he backed up on Twitter and tried to say like, well, what I should have said was,
if you've listened to that answer, I mean, he very like lays out the case that this is
actually what we needed to showcase all of React 18 and we really couldn't show it until
next 13 came out.
So there's a lot of coordination there, I don't know, yeah, I don't know how I feel
about it.
Yeah.
And there was a thread with, I think it was from Dan Abramov.
He was talking about, okay, like let's step back and zoom out and talk about what React
is and he describes it as, you know, an architecture with certain patterns and it leaves room for
implementation.
So there's a core architecture that you can take advantage of, but it's up to like last
mile frameworks like next JS to, you know, assemble everything together that fully takes
advantage of it.
And he phrase it as next is the first framework to do this and give you a fully packaged thing,
you know, which is great and I think it's a realization of that vision, but it also makes
me wonder, is it the first or is it the last, right?
It's a common thing where you build this like big reusable thing, but only ever use it once
because how many variations of it do you really need?
Yeah.
And that's a good segue into like bullet point number one, I guess, in terms of next JS kind
of turbo pack.
It's a good segue because I think the big question is like, is this just the next JS
build tool?
Or is it going to be a bigger thing in the ecosystem?
Or other people going to use it?
Like they say a lot in the conference and in the talks.
There's like one very specific turbo pack, Maya gives a talk about the details of turbo
pack, like dives into the it's going to be so extensible in the plugin system and like
all this.
But that's all just kind of like talk.
And I think that's the biggest thing about turbo pack.
I was very excited reading through the docs, like looking at turbo pack early and thinking
like this could be this could be really great, but then you quickly realize it's like it's
still very early.
I think it's one of those deals where there's a date on the calendar where there's going
to be a conference.
They're going to announce turbo pack.
They've got all the cool visuals explaining the performance benefits and all this stuff.
But like it's just going to be what it is right now.
They're calling it alpha.
It doesn't support some things.
There's there's like dynamic isn't supported.
It's only dev mode, so there's no production builds yet, but basically, versatile is decided
they're going to build all the tooling for your JavaScript stuff.
So all of it is going to be built with native technologies, Rust mostly, and that they're
going to own that thing.
They're not going to use Vte.
They're not going to use any of the community kind of like the stuff that like people are
mostly moving to, right?
Like most of the framers are kind of congealing on Vte, I think.
Is that accurate?
Yeah, I would say so.
And they're just going to sort of like carve their own past.
So they've got the successor to Webpack is how they're pointing it.
Yeah, all written in Rust, they're going to the turbo pack kind of like a play on turbo
repo.
It's all going to be one thing someday turbo, the rewriting turbo repo in Rust.
There's just a lot to take in, but I think the overwhelming thing is like feels very
Apple Silicon like they're going to do it all in house.
Yeah, in her talk, I felt like she only lacked the like cool room that the guy, the Apple
M1 guy talks about the processors, like they needed that.
She was just sort of like a little circle in her talk.
But yeah, I don't know.
What are your thoughts on turbo pack?
Yeah, I think part of me is really excited for it.
And let me try to, I have a very specific reason why.
So like you use CDK, you know, I work on SST, there's a challenge when using something
like CDK or SST because, you know, with these tools, you're defining, you know, infrastructure
you need as you're going to get deployed AWS, but you're also describing the build artifacts
you need.
You're like, I need this function built, I need this function built, I need this front
end built, et cetera.
So these tools end up being both a infrastructure as code tool, but also a build tool.
But they don't have advanced build tool capabilities, like what turbo repo has, right?
It doesn't, there's not like built in way to do caching or like, you know, skipping
builds that, you know, no, where nothing has changed.
And CDK builds can be pretty slow.
And I want, ever since I started using turbo repo, I'm like, wow, I wish this functionality
worked inside of CDK, because from turbo repo perspective, CDK builds is one thing, it's
either going to build all of it or it's going to build, it's going to skip it because it's
cash, which is helpful, but you know, it's not granular.
So I've been looking for a way to take all the learnings from turbo repo and put it in
CDK.
So only rebuild functions that have been been that have changed only build front ends that
have changed.
But there's a lot of work to build that.
So with this turbo pack thing, I'm kind of hoping, oh, if they expose those library,
I can suck in all that functionality into SST and get all that great, all that great
stuff that they built and even integrate with some of the remote caching stuff can be compatible
with any of the remote caching providers that they'll eventually do.
So it seems very promising and I'd love to like centralize on that instead of kind of
continuously rebuilding everything they've already done.
At the same time, it's kind of like, like you said, the scope is so broad, right?
I would have been happy with just like turbo repo, but kind of polished up and made more
as a library.
Yeah.
But also like building their own, you know, transpiler, like doing all these things, but
in their own dev server, like they're a different approach of how they hot reload all these
things.
I'm sure for their very narrow, specific use case, once they, you know, hit that, it's
going to be amazing, but it's kind of impossible to really build something great if you're not
dogfooding it.
And I'm kind of wondering how much are people in next JS and then in Vercel thinking about
non-next JS users and like thinking about their workflows and what they need, whereas
V is a much more decentralized thing, right?
Every framework kind of centralized on it builds optimal workflows contributes back.
So I'm like, I like the structure of the V project more.
And I think Evan, you also had a good thread on comparing and I think he made some good
counterpoints acknowledged the stuff that Turbo Pack is doing well.
Yeah.
It's a, I don't know, the all the examples, like of this very early turbo pack thing when
they talk about the performance, the starting point is like 3000 modules.
So like you have a react project with 3000 files.
Is that a lot?
That's a lot for me.
I can't imagine.
Is that not just like I, it includes your node depths.
Okay.
So that's more realistic.
We all have roughly a million of.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Okay.
That makes way more sense than I'm thinking like in my like pages directory and my components
directory having 3000 files and I never worked on anything like that.
Okay.
So that makes way more sense than I, I guess the, the parcel, I'm going to totally blank
on everybody's name, but the creator of parcel tweeted, he was disappointed.
They didn't reference, because the big thing about turbo pack is the incremental.
It's same with turbo repo, like incrementally building, only building things that change.
Right.
And he was, he tweeted.
He was disappointed.
They didn't mention it at Nick, she has comp as like inspiration for the incremental build
stuff.
They mentioned basil at Google, uh, actually maya and her talk does mention it because
she wrote it for partially, which I didn't know.
This is all very fascinating.
She works for herself now because everyone works for herself now.
So there was some inspiration taken there, the incremental build stuff.
But he also pointed out, or maybe it was Evan that pointed out, we're talking about like
going from 0.9 or 0.09 to 0.01 seconds in terms of the HMR reload, I think is what the
example it was Evan.
So how much does all this matter in practice?
Like how much does, I mean, rust, I know there's a lot of benefits besides performance.
It's like building all their tooling and rust, probably easier to maintain.
I think rust really good about that.
Right.
So there's reasons, but I do wonder the big question for me is, is this just next year
is build tool or will it become a thing in the broader ecosystem?
Will people write plugins for it?
Will that be a thing?
I think people pointed out SWC like there are no third party plugins for SWC.
It's all been written by herself.
And is that another, is that what's going to happen here?
Does it matter?
I don't know.
Yeah.
I do wonder about that too.
And even, I don't know if you saw a thing about, I think it was one of the Webpack core
contributors.
And he was saying it's weird they branded it as a successor to Webpack because I'm still
working on Webpack.
Yeah.
Let me do it in releases.
So the positioning is definitely weird in a few places.
And yeah, I do wonder, like some of these other rich ecosystems, I think you do have
this thing where with a completely open ecosystem, 99% of the plugins are garbage and you're
sifting through them to find the one present that are good.
Yeah.
And so, I'm assuming every single thing that they publish is going to be pretty good.
So yeah, it's honestly the same thing as the Apple versus Android thing.
It's very familiar to that.
If your choice is on Apple, but everything's going to work together and be great, but if
you ever need to go outside of what they think you should be doing, it's just going to be
a pain.
Yeah.
I do use Apple stuff.
And I guess I do use NYXGIS and I've deployed Vercel.
What am I talking about?
I have no complaints.
It's all going to get better.
One thing that's missing from Turbo Pack in this very early alpha release is Tailwind.
You have to like run it in a sidecar.
That bummed me out.
I don't know.
Maybe it's a little thing, but I feel like everyone uses Tailwind, right?
And there was a thing in the QA where Maya actually answered a question about Tailwind support
in Turbo Pack and made it sound more ominous like, oh, yeah, that's a JavaScript thing.
How are we going to like, we're going to have to create some system for running JavaScript-y
things like JavaScript plugins in this Rust thing?
I don't know.
Like, maybe it's not just as simple as like they didn't get to it.
There's actually like a whole thing they have to do.
Yeah.
It is tricky because an ES build and SWC also run into this.
People want to write the plugins in JavaScript, which makes sense.
But the core is in Go or Rust and the interrupt might slow things extremely down unless you
build a fairly limited plugin system.
So yeah, I can definitely see the challenges with that.
It did sound like, at least I've been seeing the talk you're referring to, but at least
when they were up on stage altogether, it sounded like, oh, yeah, it's going to come.
We just haven't gotten to it.
Yeah.
Oh, I think so.
They don't want everyone like package JSON scripts looking like that with concurrently.
Yeah.
I definitely just having done this thing where you like have a big event.
I don't know if a company as big as Versailles is a more sophisticated way of doing this,
but at some point you just have to pick a date for the conference because you need to like
lead up time to do marketing, like all the stuff that goes into planning that, you sound
like randomly pick a date and then you just try to get as much package into that date as
you can.
And which is why I think a lot of these conferences, it's like very exciting, but then it's always
like, oh, this is an alpha or this is coming out soon or this is like, you know, partially
complete.
It's hard to time everything together like that.
Oh, for sure.
And Apple does a really good job with it where like, you can order now, but they're Apple
and everyone else is trying to be Apple, or at least Versailles is, but even at hardware
or software.
It took them a few years to get to that, right?
Oh, yeah.
First you conferences was always like coming in fall of next year.
Yeah.
I can remember so those.
Last thing on Turbo Pack, I thought I had one last thing.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
I love the graphics and all the talking points around like it's like 700 or 600 times faster
than Webpack.
It's like that's such a self burn because the only reason anyone uses Webpack anymore
is because I'm the X.
Yeah.
It's like, who uses Webpack and Tobias works there and, I don't know, I just thought that
was funny.
Like it might as well say a million times faster than Webpack.
Yeah.
So this performance stuff, I think in practice is binary.
It either feels instant or you go and do something else while you're waiting for it to.
And once you pass that threshold, I don't know how much these tight, like V hit that
threshold of, I start it and I know it's going to be ready right away.
I build it.
I know it's going to be ready pretty much right away.
So yeah, I'm sure these incremental things are good to do, but as a good end user, it
doesn't feel like a game changer for me.
Yeah.
So that's, so that's Turbo Pack.
I did.
I said last thing.
There's one last thing, uh, spilt kit.
So we're terrorists at Vercel and, and the whole spilt kit has already changed bundlers
twice once.
I don't know.
And now Vercel's building their own bundler does felt kit move to it.
Does that cause drama?
Am I trying to create something that's not there?
I don't know.
I just, the whole ridge here is there is confusing me.
Yeah.
Go ahead.
I mean, cause it didn't, it doesn't.
Rich hair is also, is any of the creative roll up as well?
I think so, but they move from roll up to V. Is that right or no?
Or they move from something to roll up.
V uses.
So V is like a.
V uses role.
Yeah.
It uses role for production, but then they use their like, yes, native ESM thing for
depth, which I've always loved that pattern, but the total repo talks seem like they were
saying that isn't good.
I don't know.
It still makes sense to me.
But yeah.
So he uses, so if Velki uses V right, uh, but they moved to it from something, right?
I think so.
I don't remember.
They've already had a, like their pre version one was felt kit, but they've already changed
bundlers once.
And there's like the mumblings of what they really, what they change again to move on
to the versatile thing.
Cause rich worship rich said something in the pre show that was like, how awesome it was
to work at resell and get to build a work on smelt full time.
Is there no other company that would pay rich Harris to work on smelt full time?
I feel like he could find some more.
I don't know.
I'm sure he courted like, I'm sure he did like a whole round of.
You think so?
Yeah.
Cause I know, I know Ryan did.
So it's all Js.
Yeah.
He talked to literally everyone and he's at Netlify now.
Is that right?
Yeah, he's yeah.
Sorry.
He's at Netlify.
Yeah.
And he like, of course weighed the personal compensation, but also weighed, you know, like
in terms of the best positioning for solid Js as a product.
Yeah.
Going to resell is tricky because you are in a company that has a clear competitor.
Right.
So I can see why some of that's tricky with, with Richard at Vercel.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I think I just have a hard time imagining five years from now how all that plays out.
Yeah.
That's good.
Okay.
I've never used soap.
So I should just stop talking.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I'm not even a front end engineer.
Why am I talking about any of this?
Okay, so the second bullet point, the layouts RFC, this is probably where you, you hinted,
like you don't follow a lot of it because you don't use next year's and maybe I could
be helpful.
Maybe.
Maybe not.
Yeah.
Okay.
So this was the next year, 13, the big thing is taking advantage of all the react 18 stuff.
So server components, layouts.
What else?
I mean, that's, I mean, that's the big ones, right?
There's just unified data fetching now, which I learned yesterday or today watching all
these talks is actually like experimental underscore use coming out of react to an experimental
use thing.
I thought it was just used, but it's experimentally used.
So basically this one way to fetch data, it sounds like that you don't in next year.
So previously in next year's, I keep forgetting you don't use it previously.
There's like three different major ways.
There's SSG and SSR and ISR, right?
And they have different like named functions that you export from your thing, your pages
specifically.
Those that sounds like are kind of like not going to be there anymore.
You don't use those in this new world and the app directory.
You just fetch data in one way, and they do all these optimizations at runtime to like
D-dupe.
And I don't understand how the ISR part, like how cache still are revalidated.
I don't understand how that gets replaced, but they may, it sound like it does.
So now you can define like a layout in a directory, layout.js or TS, and that defines this sort
of server component.
Well, all components are now server components by default, they can fetch data and allegedly
not send a lot of JavaScript that's not needed to the client, although that's been talked
about already on the internet, like they still send the same amount.
I don't know.
People have been building React 13 or next year's 13 apps and seeing more JavaScript in the
client bundle than before.
So I don't know what it all means, but apparently eventually we'll send as a little JavaScript
to the client as possible in some point in the future.
I don't know when that happens.
That's the layouts RFC.
But then there's also client, you can create client components, which I learned also is
like this weird string at the top, this used client, you just put that at the top and literally
in a string.
Like comment, literally a string, like the used strict thing.
Yeah, like you strict, exactly, but it's like used client, and that's a client component.
Hmm.
I don't know.
I don't know how it's all going to, like I've not done any of this.
So, yeah, the promise though is less JavaScript from the client someday, go ahead.
Some of that is familiar, like the use RFC, which I did read through.
I think the trajectory I see, maybe I might be wrong about this, but I think React Queer
is very sort of got people used to this pattern of just any async test goes into this thing.
And you automatically get certain properties, like whether it's completed, whether it's pending,
you know, the actual value, things like that.
And then there's something called create resource added to solid.js, which is very similar to
the use hook.
It's like a core level primitive that you pass in any async function to, and it returns an
object that has, you know, the value if it's there, if it's loading, et cetera.
So that's native to solid.js.
Because it's native integrassable, it's suspense stuff.
So if you have a suspense up top, and you have like, you know, nested series of components
that are all that I'll have resources that are waiting on, it can just wait on all of
that before rendering them all.
So it fixes that pop in issue, and that integrates nicely with SSR, and it's just like works really
nicely all around a little bit easier in the solid world, because the implementation is
kind of simple, because it's just reactivity based, whereas use and react probably needed
a lot of work to implement correctly.
And it's probably why it's still in experimental, they're trying to figure out what it is pattern.
One people like it, and two, if it's implemented correctly.
But this kind of brings me to a broader feeling I've had where, you know, I don't use Next.js,
but you know, I'm pretty familiar with front end stuff.
Watching the conference and all the Q&A and all that, I was surprised that I didn't understand
most of it.
And I kind of got this feeling of, I generally don't complain, like I know there's a general
complaint around front end really complicated and it moves fast.
I definitely hear that, but I generally don't feel that too much, just something like this
is my hobby, I'm like into this stuff, the more changes, the more fun it is for me.
But I was looking at some of this and I was like, man, does this really have to be this
complicated?
I am like barely falling along.
Yeah.
It seems really hard for what seems like pretty simple outcomes.
If you felt the same way.
I totally feel the same way.
And I think that's like the voices in the community that are like hard on the other side
that have been saying it's all too complicated, this could be way simpler than this and even
have offered up solutions to make it simpler.
They're getting louder and louder in my head as I listen to this stuff.
And I think like how many layers deep are we in this stuff that I can't fully grok.
And I feel like I've been using React for like eight years, almost a decade.
And it still doesn't all click with me.
Like I still build stuff every day where I'm like, wait, oh, yeah, of course, no, I can't
do that.
But like that stuff, the cognitive overhead, it does feel like it's reaching a tipping
point for me and maybe within the broader community.
I do wonder like one of the talks kind of made the case that like we need these layers
of abstraction to do things that scale from startup.
It's totally the SST thing from startup to like mega company, like we need these things
and you stand on the shoulders of Vercel and you can build this thing and you know it'll
work for 100 million users like it works for 10 users.
Do you think there's truth in that?
Like, is that why we need all this complex stuff?
Is it just not there, like eventually it'll be simpler, but we just need more layers?
Yeah.
I mean, I'm biased because I use solid and I see a world where it's not like you're absolutely
beginning to pick it up and they're like good to go, but so much.
I felt like like a weight that I didn't know was there just like dropped out of my head.
Just so much.
I want to get that out of my head, yeah.
I went through this thing where when I first started using it, I was like, because it looks
so much like React, the first two months, I was like, oh, I get it, like I'm doing it.
I'm building stuff and I was building stuff, but two months in, I realized I was making
everything overly complicated because just my like React training.
And once I shed all that, it was like, wow, I'm back to just dealing with DOM element and
like touching them directly and like everything is just so straightforward.
So I feel like it doesn't have to be this complicated.
I think React is incredible in that a core idea from 10 years ago is still like relevant
and the main way people are doing things and they've been able to shift and adapt it.
But at some point, you know, everything, everything goes through its phase of that, you know,
I'm into solid just right now, there's going to be a time where I hate it.
I've been to this with enough with enough technologies.
I know that it always happens.
So and what about so solid kind of like removing that react burden?
What about like what next provides and all of the, so I guess if you're using VIT, you're
using things that are, they've solved like we don't have to think about Webpack or transpiling
or any of that stuff anymore, but like what about the get the data fetching, the get server
side props equivalent?
It's like, if you need to do stuff, I mean, I think you don't really do this much.
You mostly build like client driven, like rich apps that are used by focused groups of people.
But do you think that that's, is the Astro like does Astro and solid get me like 95% of
the way there with what I'm used to in next?
Yeah, exactly.
And so you're right.
Most of my time has spent on like long session apps.
So they tend to be SPA's, but even when you build an SPA at some point, you have to build
a marketing page, blog, like just other things like that.
And yeah, so things like next and in that category, these meta frameworks, yeah, I'm
not going to set up SSR on my own.
I remember used to having to do that.
And it was terrible.
I never actually did it right.
And I think that was even how next described it when I first came out, they were like, nobody
does this, right?
So yeah, I mean, they're great.
But it's not really next for me.
I think next is a great job packaging, this complexity into something pretty digestible.
It's just when I get peaks into the underlying stuff and I get that you don't have to do
that right away.
You can be a beginner and stay at a high level.
But you know, you never feel good if the stuff you're sitting on feels like really chaotic.
Yeah.
You want things to feel like simpler at the low level and you're kind of surprised that
when you dig into it, you want to be surprised.
Oh, this is a lot simpler than I thought it was.
Because the other way around it's kind of, you sort of feel uneasy, at least I do.
Yeah.
So that was the whole middle point of the conference of the keynote, like, is this layouts RFC and
now rolling in the next year, 13?
And it does, I think, leave me uneasy.
I just feel like there's so much that I don't understand and I don't know why I don't understand.
But maybe it'll all start making sense.
I haven't used this stuff.
Maybe once I'm using server components and I'm creating client components and it all just
makes sense to me.
I don't know.
The react contributor on the Q&A did say there will be a learning curve as people start
thinking about the distinction between the two.
Yeah, but then I just think of the Brian LaRouze of the world and like what they think of
all this.
It's so hard for me to hear that voice in my head.
I think he would die if he watched the conference, I think your heart would just stop.
Okay, so then the third thing was like, I don't even remember the name that they use,
but it's like higher level web components.
So it's like, you need to serve images in the right way.
So let's just go through them.
There's like next image, there's next font, there's next link.
Next image and next font or next link existed.
They both got better by removing stuff.
So next image, you don't have like all the JavaScript stuff.
I think they're using like intersection observers and all this, whatever they were doing before
with all this JavaScript now just uses the native browser stuff.
I guess it's far enough along now with browser support, it'll load images based on native
browser API.
So they basically stripped out a lot of the JavaScript.
And now next image is lighter, more accessible, better, just uses the platform.
So that's next image.
I think, I think that's only available next 13.
I don't know if they'd already rolled that out or not.
But next link, you don't have to put anchor tags in anymore.
Again, you don't use next year.
So this may not make sense.
No, I'm familiar with that.
I have used next, so I'm familiar with some of the patterns.
Yeah.
So you had to have like an anchor tag just like this naked anchor tag in your link tags,
which is always dumb.
Now you don't have to.
So now your links don't involve anchor tags about, no, I know they're probably rendering
anchor tags.
I just know people like Brian or Lou would hear that like, great, we don't have to do
anchor tags now.
And then next font is new.
I'm so hyped about this one.
There's a fourth thing we'll talk about, too.
I'm all over the place, I'm sorry.
The next font thing was maybe the most excited I got at the whole conference because the
number of times I want to use a Google font, I search on Google fonts, I find it.
And then it's like, you could just drop the script on your page if you want to be bad
and do bad things.
And I'm like, not going to do that.
I'm going to look up again how to do the best thing and self-host it and preload.
And the inline the CSS, and then also you got to do your, is it optional?
Are you going to swap it like a chump and have layout shift?
Like what are you going to do with the font when you get it?
The problem I have with that whole thing, I always spend forever just like remembering
all the places I have to put stuff and then I use tailwinds, I put the font and tailwind.
I do all that.
And then the best path for performance, if you want to like check all the web vitals
boxes is to use the optional font loading strategy, right?
And optional means everyone that hits your site and then leaves and never comes back
sees the dumb basic font, so this is not your custom font.
So like the first load of the page, it's probably not going to load the font fast enough, even
with your preload.
And they're just not even going to ever see the custom font.
So it always felt like you either have layout shift or you only show the cool font to people
who come back.
And I hated that.
So I love the next font, you just use a font from Google fonts, like you import it into
your thing, just like you import any other module.
You choose like enter or whatever the font is, they download, they self-host it.
I know you've used something that does something like this in node modules, but it self-host
the font.
It does all the preloading.
It just does everything.
It does all those things.
But then also it sounds like it uses a swap font loading strategy and it uses like margins
and stuff.
There's some browser API for it, I guess, for like accommodating, like making the font
not layout shift when it swaps in, which sounds amazing.
If that all works, I'll be very happy.
Got it.
So does it basically know for each font, like some dimensions of what the font would take
up?
I believe so.
I think there's some CSS property, right, that's you adjust it.
So then there's no layout shift when it swaps.
That's pretty awesome.
It is awesome.
I'm so excited about it.
It's also done being like hyped up about this font thing when the whole conference, that's
the only thing that really got me excited.
The fourth thing was the OG generation, which they actually put, they posted this on Twitter
a couple of weeks ago, but they announced it at the conference.
It's actually really cool.
You can render dynamic social images with React components.
It's some weird like stripped down, they've made like their own thing that turns a React
component into an SVG or something, or I don't know, or into an image.
You can use like a subset of tailwind.
Sorry.
I'm talking too much.
Go ahead.
No, no, I was just listening.
Yeah, that was actually one of the old SSD tutorials was building something like that
where you can build a OG image generator, like a serverless thing where a lambda function
generates it once.
But yeah, having that built in is great.
There's even like whole SAS tools that just help you with this, right?
I know there's that.
Oh, yeah.
Cool, and that I think that's like the whole fully integrated vertical thing, the Apple
model of like, we're going to have everything you need.
That's where it's really nice.
I do love like, it's the kind of stuff that'll hook me like I'll keep using next because
of next slash font and the OG image generation like that stuff was just like really annoying
little things that it's really like, I don't like having to manage those on my own.
So I do like that they because they do the hosting with Vercel, like they can actually
pull off this vertical thing that cross cuts several different areas.
Like you're writing this component in your thing that renders an image that gets served
at the edge and all, you know, all that comes into play there.
But you can't really do that if you don't own the full thing.
So it's pretty cool.
Yeah.
And I think these, some of these other meta frameworks, they kind of have to build in
a neutral vendor, neutral way.
And that does limit some of some of their functionality, like they couldn't build like
an ISR feature, for example.
Yeah, it makes sense.
So okay, high level thoughts or do you have anything on any of the app components or
any of that last bullet point that you care about?
Well, I mean, again, it's probably a negative thought, but I did have a moment during the
conference where I was like, we're all sitting here gathered around watching this thing and
excited and we're talking about a link component.
Like I get there's a lot of underlying routing and lots of deep implications there, but it's
like, you don't have to put a tag inside this other tag and that's like, you know, one of
the main announcements and I was thinking back to how I always go this way whenever Unreal
Engine has like a new version and then they do their demo, I'm like, yeah, they're showing
off how you can create like entire universes and like perfect fidelity without any work.
And our equivalent, our industry is like, oh, like this tag doesn't need to go in this
other tag anymore.
And it just makes me feel pretty lame.
Yeah, no, it is kind of a lot to do about nothing.
Yeah, it's hard because I do get excited about some of these things that are pretty trivial
things.
And when you think about like how outsiders, people who aren't web developers would view
what we do.
Like they wouldn't think we'd be excited about the things we get excited about.
I don't know.
It's like Apple, it's the whole Apple parallel.
It's just been all over the internet.
I mean, everybody's like got their memes about how Versailles is very much creating this Apple
of the software world.
I want to talk like high level, Versailles, economics, their Apple comparison.
I think the Apple thing, the reason that reminded me of it is like they announced a new iPhone
every year, and at this point, nothing really changes.
We get excited about the littlest dumbest things.
It's like a new camera.
That's exciting.
But it felt very like that.
There is a lot that they announced, and I don't want to discount that they have a lot
of people at Versailles working very hard on some cool problems, like all the rest stuff.
I don't know.
It's exciting.
But the things I'm most excited about from the talk, from the conference, do feel like
pretty trivial improvements.
It's just like quality of life improvements at this point.
But maybe it's just because I don't understand all of the partial hydration, and which parts
of my page won't have to re-render.
When they say won't re-render, do they mean on the server or the client?
I just get so confused that maybe I don't understand how big this is.
I'm excited about next font.
I don't know.
Well, it's your worst pain point, so.
It is.
Yeah.
It's sad, but that is my worst pain point.
I figure high-level thoughts on like, Versailles and how they pull all this off, I guess.
I can't help but watch that conference see all the lead up to it, which they brought
everybody to San Francisco to be like, "Oh, they didn't bring us, so not everybody."
They brought everybody to San Francisco as this crazy developer party where all the celebrities
in Devland are hanging out, and they have this whole production.
It's this crazy, nobody's seen it in the tech world, but then I can't help but think about
the fact that like, do they make money?
I don't know.
They've raised $350 million, but do they make money, and is this sustainable?
Is this like, are we going down?
Are we going, is this a sign of the end?
Yeah.
There's always moments you think back to when there's been a downturn of like, obviously
that was like the top or whatever.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I think I have a few, like with everything else, I'm pretty confused.
I just feel like lately in life I'm just pretty confused, most of the time, especially when
it comes to the web world.
I'm sure they're doing fine as a business.
You can't be this beloved and not make money.
Sure.
Maybe you can, but I feel like you know you got to, I'm sure some dollars are coming out.
I think the place where, and this is going to come from like my bias and the stuff I
work on, I think for most of my career, I never thought of myself as a web developer.
I thought of myself as, I work on software and oftentimes that software has like a web
component, like we have a dashboard, whatever, but you know, the meat of the value is in the
back end or like whatever, you know, business logic we've written, et cetera.
So like web, the web part was just like a tiny piece of the whole thing.
Of course, web has gotten a lot more complicated.
The experiences people get are, or expect are a lot more sophisticated, but still in my like
overall stack, it still to me feels like it's just like this component of the whole system.
And having a company trying to just monetize just that portion of it, I don't know how much
money I'm going to want to ever give them for this, at least for the stuff that I work
on, right?
In my overall bill, I would expect my front end to be like a minuscule fraction of the
bill, compared to like my database, right?
All these database providers that are coming out, like I know they're going to be making
tons of money, like you'll play, you'll pay plants, kill whatever, because that's like
everything you care about, right?
So I kind of wonder with wherever cell focuses, it's for people where the web part is the thing,
the whole product, and that tends to be, I think I'm maybe missing some things, but it
tends to be things like e-commerce, right?
E-commerce like that, your web platform is the product.
The faster it serves, the more money you make, you know, the higher quality, et cetera.
That's what you care about.
But these aren't like software companies that are making tons and tons of money.
They pretty much have like tough margins, and they are pretty sensitive to prices.
Yeah.
And we see this a lot because we help people deploy next on AWS.
A lot of people are coming to us to switch over to deploying next and AWS because they
got an email from Versailles saying, "Hey, you're like way over, or like fair use thing.
You know, we'd like you to pay like, you know, 75K a year for your usage."
And that's like pretty tough for some of these companies.
So I do, I'm sure that's not like all of Versailles business, but yeah, like how much value can
you get just doing this web portion of it, unless you start to capture like, okay, it's
going to be the whole backend and we're going to host your database, you know, Yeah, I keep
waiting for that.
I keep waiting for them to like make the obvious moves like they figured out a good developer
experience and how to create really performant web apps, like, what about all the rest of
it?
If they did the front end, where's the rest of it?
Are they going to start venturing into data and to actual APIs that just seems natural,
but they just, I mean, we would just go through another next half and they're not hinting
at that.
It seems like they're doubling down on to your point, making this small part of our
broader applications better.
Like if I think about deploying a web app on AWS, if I were not using Versailles, it's
like I spend all my money on DynamoDB and whatever, if you're using a relational database,
you know, whatever, Aurora or something, I said relational, if you're using a SQL based
database, if you're using like, those are always a big expensive thing.
And then you spend like nothing on S3 and Cloud front.
And maybe that's because I don't make apps that people use, but ultimately I do, I see
that parallel, like they are focused on this one part of a broader thing, but yeah, I guess
e-commerce that is mostly the thing, I don't know.
And they mentioned e-commerce in the conference, like as like these major e-commerce companies
that use Next.js and Versailles, I don't know.
Yeah.
And e-commerce is also hard because they serve a ton of impressions because the whole thing
with e-commerce is you drive as many people to your platform responsible and you convert
a small number of them.
Yeah.
And people like look at a lot of images, it's like heavy content stuff.
So that's why these bills add up.
Yeah.
So yeah, that whole space, I'm sure they'll win and I'm sure winning looks like a massively
successful company.
But it feels tough.
It feels a lot tougher than focusing on some of these other just high, higher value areas.
And I think the, I guess the reason if I look at what type of company they are there, really
great at focusing on DX, like solving the last mile problems on top of other infrastructure.
Like, you know, they're building originally built all on AWS.
They have stuff on workers, but I think to sell like more infrastructure type products
like a database, you kind of have to be an infrastructure company.
I don't know if that's like really in their DNA, like they're not, you know, they're not,
their core competency isn't managing like a cluster of servers or anything.
It's more focusing on the last mile on top of someone else doing the other stuff.
I think I'm more confused than I was when we started this and I don't know.
I don't know where it's all headed.
I do feel like we're in weird times in this, I don't know, this landscape right now, not
just next year.
It's just like more broadly, I guess web like, I don't feel like we're in weird times over
in like back end land or cloud land.
I feel like it's just like, that's a play, that's a parallel like AWS actually is just
making a criminal changes to all these wonderful primitives that we can build on reinvent.
I expect nothing to blow me away.
It's all very stable and this web world is so weird.
And there's so many people with strong opinions and they all have platforms and they can voice
those opinions.
And I don't know what to think anymore.
But I do think DevRel sucks.
That's one thing I'll say coming out next comp, I just don't hear more about this.
I just don't know like, what do you think about Vercel is like a culture, like an influencer
of developer culture, like they're trying to create something that really hasn't existed.
I mean, there hasn't been a DevTools company that looks like Apple when they put on an event
and that like brings in all the dignitaries and like has this very flashy, glossy appearance.
How do you think that plays out for them?
Like does that get them more usage like do developers want to use Vercel because of events
like what they just did yesterday?
Yeah, I think it definitely does.
I mean, there's no reason why the Apple strategy wouldn't work.
And I also think there is merit to it.
I kind of think of it as if you're able to pull off good design, it's because you figured
out all the other parts of your business and you have left over time for this.
So when I see good design, I think it is a good signal of something.
Most companies are like scrambling to figure out their core product.
They're never going to like get to the aesthetic stuff, right?
So I do treat it as like a real valid signal.
I think for me, like we've talked about before, whenever I see something getting popular,
I start to hate it.
It's just it's completely irrational and there's no logic to it, but I'm like, next
JS is like the top dog right now.
So I'm looking for, you know, like whoever's going to get the angle on them and like what's
coming up next and how are they going to like fumble their lead.
Yeah.
So, yeah, that's how I think about you.
Yeah, no, my feelings are probably like, they're all just driven from like FOMO, I think.
I wish I was at the conference, so I have salty feelings about the conference.
It's a lot of jealousy too.
Oh, yeah, for sure.
Definitely an angle.
I'm a sucker for aesthetics, they nail design.
I mean, they're folks, I know I've seen some of them on Twitter, they're really good.
Like, I love all of that part of it.
I think the dev role parts the part that I'm like, eh, it feels very fake and just how
many developers are really like positively influenced when they watch if you saw that
pre-show.
Like watching that pre-show, I don't think that helps for sale.
I think developers are a pretty like scrutinizing bunch.
I think we can smell out inauthenticity, inauthenticity, I can't say that word, but
we can smell it when things aren't authentic.
Yeah, I think I fundamentally, the thing that I have an issue with is I don't believe really
in this 100% dev role where that's like just your entire job.
I just find it weird, right?
You spend, you work at a company, you learn to like their product, you spend a bunch of
time like just evangelizing it and explaining to the world why everyone should use it.
You get a lot of followers, people look to you through that job.
Then some other company is like, hey, you have a lot of influence and followers, here's
a bunch of money to come to our company and now say that you love our product.
You've seen this cycle because this dev role role has been there long enough where you've
seen some people like switch companies and all of a sudden they're like vision for the
future and what software looks like is somehow centered around the new company they're working
on.
Yeah, the incentives there just don't make sense to me.
It's one thing where someone's creating the framework that they think is a future and
they love and they really have this vision and therefore they're evangelizing it and
they're committed to it.
If that dies, they can just go hop on to the next thing like it's a large level of commitment.
Dev role is a very low commitment.
You can switch and there's lots of opportunities.
So yeah, I don't know how seriously I can take some of that and the authenticity thing
is also kind of there because you're supposed to, you're like pretending like you're representing
yourself but you technically can't say anything that wouldn't be on brand for the company.
So yeah, it's just really weird.
It's weird to me.
It's weird.
There's definitely a few like prominent dev role folks that have moved around enough that
I just don't know where they work anymore and it just means nothing to me.
And they have big audiences and people, I don't know, I'm sure the people paying them
and hiring them think they're getting this asset but it's just so watered down.
At this point.
And I just think the whole career arc, it's mostly like engineers that are good at stuff
and then they start talking about the thing they're working on and then people hire them
to do dev rel and now they're like getting more and more out of touch with real engineering
problems every day and they're probably not that good at actually like being in front and
facing like representing your company.
That's the overwhelming feeling I get is that like these dev rel, they should just hire like
actual TV people.
Like you're going to make this amazing event and you're going to have somebody stand up
on stage and not look like an idiot and I'm trying not to be like, I don't want to call
out people like I ultimately, I think they're good at what they did and then they get put
into a situation where they're not so good at the thing they're doing now and why?
Why are we doing this?
What is the dev rel thing?
I just, I don't know.
I have friends that are dev rel.
I don't think it's a terrible role and I think there are reasons that they exist.
I just think sometimes they're not properly scouted and hired, I don't know.
Yeah.
It's like, I think in most other industries, they do hire professional people that are
just like good hosts and good like them.
Yeah.
It's a skill.
And it's not like an engineer necessarily has that skill.
Yeah.
Okay.
I'm going to stop because I'm just salty.
I'm just FOMO.
I missed.
This just looked like an amazing time.
Like all of them playing ping pong and all of that looks like so much fun.
Okay.
I guess we should wrap this up.
I don't know.
We've been talking for a while.
Next.
Yes, conf is good.
I'm going to make a video about it.
It's a, I don't know.
I'm trying to keep it short, but it's like 10 hours of stuff that happened.
I couldn't believe how many community talks.
So many community talks.
They were happening in parallel too, right?
Yeah.
There's the two stages.
The J and the S stage stands for JavaScript.
I just looked at my other camera.
I'm used to being on Twitch.
Whenever I say something tongue in cheek, I always look at that camera.
JavaScript.
Are there any talks that sit out to you so far?
So they're just kind of all over the place, like what?
I guess the one that stood out the most is there's somebody making like this.
It's like a music synthesizing library.
I forget the name reactatizer or something.
And he just did a whole talk where he's like making beats with like react components.
It's kind of cool.
Yeah.
The rest of it.
I don't know.
The DevRels being DevRels things like they're a DevRel for a company.
This talks about Vercel, but also here's what our company does.
But no, this is about Vercelle.
That's not that literally saying like this is not what this is about.
It's about Vercelle and how Vercelle enables us to make this awesome product.
Let me show you this awesome product.
That's just the whole conference thing, I don't know.
My feeling with that is it's cool to invite other companies, but just let them talk about
how awesome their product is like it's like weird thing where they're trying to tie it
in.
Like if PlanetScale was there, you don't need to be like tied in a Vercelle, just be like
here's our product.
Look how awesome it is.
Yeah.
PlanetScale.
It's exactly.
It's better for both parties, I think.
Yeah.
All right.
Thanks again, Dax.
This has been fun.
Yeah.
Thank you.
[Music]